---
title: "evodemos7"
layout: default
---

### Notes for EvoDemoS7 conference

I presented a slightly longer version of the lightning talk I gave at EvoDemoS7 at the virtual 2020 Ecological Society of America meeting. I've posted my talk ([link here](https://gregor-fausto.github.io/products/siegmund-geber-cos13-esa2020.mp4)), as well as a transcript and description of the slides ([link here](https://gregor-fausto.github.io/products/siegmund-geber-cos13-esa202-transcript.pdf)) to my website.

The project is part of my dissertation research, and I am working on writing it up for publication. In the meantime, I will include some links to help add a bit more detail beyond what I was able to discuss in the lightning talk format.

Here, I wrote short introduction to the density-independent models for seed banks that I discuss in my talk:

In my talk, I mention that I use hierarchical models to estimate vital rates. I plan to include a full description of the methods for this in a paper. In the meantime, if you're curious about the structure of these models, I wrote out the associated directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) and full conditional posteriors:

Finally, my talk suggests that intraspecific variation in Clarkia xantiana life history is not consistent with predictions from density-independent models of bet hedging. So, what's going on? What explains the intraspecific variation in germination? Next steps will likely involve trying to figure out if the life history patterns are consistent with predictions from density-dependent models for bet hedging, and assessing evidence for predictive germination. 

Next steps could include partitioning variation in reproductive success, incorporating density-dependence, and assessing evidence for predictive germination  


### Teaching As Research Conference
[Stepfanie Aguillon](https://stepfaniemaguillon.wordpress.com) and I just presented a poster at a (teaching as research conference)[https://www.cte.cornell.edu/programs-services/Peer-Institutions/teaching-as-research-Conference.html] at Cornell University.
