---
title: "wishlist"
layout: default
---


### Janice Beatley

Stuckey, R. (1990) Janice Carson Beatley (1919-1987): Taxonomist and Ecologist. Taxon. 39(2) pp. 212-217.

Janice Beatley grew up in Columbus, Ohio, and obtained a BA, MS, and PhD from The Ohio State University. Over the course of her life, she held professional positions at seven institutions in Ohio, Tennessee, North Carolina, New Mexico, Nevada, and California. Her graduate work involved comprehensive study of Ohio's vegetation. Her master's thesis was a study of the 'wintergreen herbaceous angiosperms' of Ohio; over 1000 plants were studied in the field and greenhouse, and 287 of these were subject to ecological classification, description, and taxonomic assignment. Notably, the study "is believed to be the first comprehensive study of its kind for any geographical area of North America." Her doctoral research was a study of 'primary forests' of Vinton and Jackson counties (in southern Ohio) that were similar (or intact?) to those that occurred immediately prior to European colonization/settlement. The work correlated the distribution of forest communities with the physical environment. This seems to have been a capstone of sorts, as the department at TOSU had for 40 years been focused on describing the natural vegetation of Ohio. It was also significant because the area studied by Dr. Beatley was thought to be some of the most biodiverse in the state. This is also remarkable: "...study was based on field work of approximately 140 days during three years (1950-1953) driving over 20,000 miles in the two-county area of 837 square miles."

Dr. Beatley spent thirteen years of her career conducting research at the Nevada Atomic Test Site in southern Nevada. Over the course of her time there, she worked on "annotated checklists of the vascular plants, geographical distribution, effects of radioactive and non-radioactive dust, status of introduced species, survival of winter annuals, relationships of plants to precipitation, discovery of new species, endangered and threatened species" and published over 30 papers and grey literature publications (among them, a 316 page book). The Nevada Atomic Test Site lies in the Great Basin, and is comprised of 25 mountain ranges and concomitant basins. Remarkably, the region was essentially unstudied biologically when Dr. Beatley began her work. [what's the history of the area?] [Dr. Beatley's PhD advisor, Dr. John Wolfe, moved to the Atomic Energy Commission in 1955 - how was this related to her appointment at the Test Site?] Dr. Beatley recognized the unique position she found herself in and simultaneously engaged in research, exploration, and discovery. Her work reflects these catholic interests: she pursued long-term work on the germination and growth of desert plants that illuminated the importance of winter rainfall, showed that survival and germination of annuals exhibited inter-annual variation that depended on climate, and discovered new taxa (three were named after her by Dr. James Reveal). 

Dr. Beatley did not believe in the importance of competition in natural systems. In a letter to Charles C. King, Director of the Ohio Biological Survey (15 January 1978) she wrote "...the existence of 'competition' has rarely been proved under field conditions;...the theories relating to it are just that-theories-and are based on laboratory studies exclusively" and that "...the ones who 'labor in the fields,' day after day and year after year are never the ones who write about 'competitive interactions' - it's the ones who sit in their offices, and execute little lab experiments, that dream up these fairy tales (and get promoted)..." She cited some of her own work with Larrea tridentata as evidence, suggesting that populations with tall, large-diameter plants were correlated with high rainfall and low temperatures; low density populations were more difficult to explain but thought to be the result of reproductive failure through time.

Dr. Beatley also pursued a line of research on the distribution of buckeyes in Ohio. This was work that she started as a graduate student in the 1950s and then returned to after coming back to Ohio in the 1970s. She was a member of scientific societies and conservation organizations. 

Beatley, JC (1966) Winter Annual Vegetation Following a Nuclear Detonation in the Northern Mojave Desert (Nevada Test Site). Radiation Botany 6 pp. 69-82.

The Sedan event, part of the Atomic Energy Commission's Plowshare program, was a detonation that was executed at Yucca flat on July 6, 1962. ("a low intermediate yield thermonuclear device") The effects ranged from "total removal of aboveground parts, to partial uprooting of shrubs, to differential abrading, bending, and breaking of exposed parts." The paper has a picture from each site (52, 53, 54) but I wonder if there are before/after photos that are available?

From (plot 53) "nearly total destruction of the above-ground parts of shrubs from the blast, and gross modification of the original soil surface", to (plot 52) "what appeared to be differential mechanical damage to the above-ground parts of shrubs, and major soil surface alterations" to (plot 54) "no physical damage to the shrubs or disturbance of the soils at the time of the blast, but a deposit of radioactive dust over the intact plants and soil surface". At the end of the 1964 spring season, with the exception of a few Larrea branches at Plot 54, "none of the pre-Sedan above-ground parts of any of the shrubs was living." A small percentage of shrubs sprouted and Oryzopsis hymenoides assumed the position of dominant perennial. There was also a significant shift to Salsula kali (Russian thistle) - look at another of Beatley's papers.

In the year following the blast, there was limited winter precipitation and so very little germination. The following year saw significant rainfall and "untold millions of seedlings" without an obvious difference in species composition (absolute or relative) from before the blast, though the winter annuals now shared space with Russian thistle. 

Field methods include: species diversity, percent cover, and plant height in 0.1 m^2 quadrats. Dosimeters were taped to shrubs at each plot the day before the detonation to measure ionizing radiation and removed on 27 and 28 September 1962. After that, plots were monitored for radiation with film badges. Weekly precipitation was measured.

Seedlings of the species at the Sedan area were "outstanding for their exceptionally large size, apparent vigour, and aspect of gigantism, in comparison with those on all other study sites of the ntework". They were estimated to be 2-3 times the size of seedlings of others around Yucca flat, and seedlings at Plot 54 exhibited increased rugosity. Seedlings at the sedan site saw increased survival in the winter immediately following the blast. Species were likewise much larger and had great mass at the Sedan site than at other locations. This is explained perhaps by increased availability of soil moisture: both through dead or physiologically inactive shrubs and disturbance of soil that removes hardpacked 'desert pavement' ie. the physical properties of the soil.

Ionizing radiation was thought to have a 'stimulating' effect on plant growth, which confirmed previous laboratory and experimental field work. Seeds and seedlings in the vicinity of shrubs were likely to have received greater gamma and beta radiation than those growing in the open (suggested by field readings). But increased soil moisture must be recognized as a probable contribution to increased size. Surface deposition of nutrients moved by the blast might also play an important role. Seeds were most likely to be exposed to the effects of radiation; long exposure time. Plants were examined for morphological abnormalities, though the population was not surveyed similarly before the blast. At peak of flowering, it was observed that there were many Chaenactis stevioides with reduced internodes, and failure of corollas and flower parts to develop. (some of these specimens were kept as vouchers!) The same species was observed elsewhere and no abnormalities were noted. 

There is some impressive language at work here: "...the effects upon populations of native organisms are therefore expected to be subtle ones and difficult to demonstrate with certainty in field populations until more precise techniques have been developed for measurement of the various parameters through which they may be expressed. The nature of the complexities of some of these problems, and need for understandings of a number of interrelated phenomena, are evident from the present study."

